# Crypto is the money of criminals

Cryptocurrency is often the target of accusations and ridiculous claims. Among
these, some of the most frequent are that crypto facilitates crime, that crypto
is predominantly used by criminals, or even that it can only be used for crime.
Although the first might certainly seem reasonable at first, none of these
claims are actually true, for one simple reason. Most of crypto is traceable.

## Crypto is traceable

Blockchains are simply lists of transactions. Cryptocurrencies want to ensure,
for obvious reasons, that a transaction cannot modify the supply of money. To
do this, they need to verify two things. First, the number of coins that are
sent by a transaction are the same as the number that are recieved. Second,
that the sender has enough coins to send the number they are sending. The
simplest way to verify that these rules are upheld are simply to include the
amounts that are sent and the participants of the transaction in the data on
the blockchain.

Crypto is so public that it is a privacy nightmare for most. It is extremely easy
to read the blockchain and find out, in great detail, everywhere a person has
spent money, and everyone they have sent money to. To say the least, this is
not desirable for a criminal.

There are techniques to increase anonymity. The catch is that these can always
be detected, and institutions dealing in crypto trading and payments often
reject money which has signs of being anonymized, or employ strategies to
deanonymize users of these techniques. Blockchains like Zcash and Grin claim
to provide anonymity through cryptography (they do not include amounts, senders
and receivers in the transaction data), but they turn out to not be so great —
not because the cryptography is flawed, but because users make mistakes, and
their transaction volume is often too low to create a reasonable anonymity set.
Much like how the Tor network doesn't work for criminals if only other
criminals use it, blockchains with privacy features are not private if only a
few people are sending coins at any one point in time.

Recently, the attacker behind the 2016 hack of The DAO was found. Ethereum,
the blockchain this attack was conducted on, was reverted after much debate
among the community. They did this by creating a "hard fork", resulting in two
separate blockchains, and collectively switching to the new branch. However,
the other branch still exists to this day, and is now named Ethereum Classic.
Coins on Ethereum Classic are worth much less than real Ethereum, but the
hacker was still capable of cashing out something, and they did. Chainalysis,
a company specializing in blockchain analysis, was able to deanonymize the
hacker's Bitcoin transactions and tracked the resulting Bitcoin to exchanges.
These transactions were anonymized using CoinJoin, a technique which was tought
to be safe until Chainalysis revealed their capabilities. All fiat off-ramps,
places which allow you to sell crypto for traditional real-life (fiat) money,
require identifying information from users because of KYC (Know Your Customer)
guidelines from regulators, allowing authorities to then figure out who was
behind it all.

Of course, there are still blockchains with privacy, Monero being a good
example, but it may already be flawed and we might not know. Crypto is the
money of the untrained criminal, unaware of the wonders of modern forensics
analysis. But what if it wasn't — what if we did have perfect anonimity?
Would crypto then faciliate crime?

## What if?

The truth is that truly private money probably would not have much impact on
crime. After all, criminals already successfully launder money. A lot of it.
According to a [2011 report](https://www.unodc.org/documents/data-and-analysis/Studies/Illicit_financial_flows_2011_web.pdf)
by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Anti-Money Laundering efforts
have a success rate of 0.2%. Newer research suggests even lower success rates.
In other words, criminals keep at least 99.8% of their illicit earnings. In
comparison, globally, more than 40% of cocaine is seized. Is money laundering
really so much easier than drug trafficking?

Governments may not be *trying* to let criminals get away with their proceeds,
but the reality is that they are failing. Regardless of whether they are
malicious or incompetent, they are conducting mass surveilance of their
citizens for no benefit to the population. This all happens while the costs
of AML policies are ever-increasing, despite efficiency being meager and
potentially even decreasing over time.

Anti-Money Laundering is only as weak as the weakest link, and any loophole
will be exploited. We could keep going with AML, try to play the cat and mouse
game, try to solve every single loophole, worldwide, if that's even possible,
but is the solution to this failure really to add more surveilance? Regulators
have advocated for "more of the same" for decades and no progress has been
made. What *has* happened is that getting access to the financial system has
gotten progressively harder, especially for minorities and those already stuck
in poverty.

As demonstrated by the abyssmal effectiveness of the AML regime, criminals
already have access to banking services with privacy. Why can't *everyone* get
the same access? Crypto allows anyone to get access to money with no
intermediaries, access to their money only for themselves, but it doesn't have
privacy yet. Crypto should be money for criminals, not those who become profit
from abuse, the rest of criminals: marginalized groups, political activists,
sex workers, civil rights organisations, etc.
