# Cryptocurrency is trust in democracy

Cryptocurrencies do not have intrinsic value. Anyone can start a protocol, name
it Bitcoin, and give themselves large amounts of the "currency" represented on
the system. The same can be said for paper bills: they are worth what they are
worth because we have collectively decided that that's what they're worth.
This is perhaps what makes cryptocurrency interesting. They are a social
experiment, an attempt to ask how humans will trust a computer protocol with no
owner to manage a monetary system, compared to an authority like a country's
central bank. In reality, there's much more to the social experiment than that.

Cryptocurrency enthusiasts often claim that blockchains are trustless.
That is, under favorable conditions, they allow anyone to trust that the entire
system follows some properties without having to trust one central entity.
These "favorable conditions" are usually that a majority of participants are
honest (they are not actively coordinating an attack). In a cryptocurrency,
contrary to when using a central authority like a bank, no single entity can
disturb properties like censorship resistance, because the consensus mechanisms
impose a considerable monetary cost to doing so. Additionally, rules in a
cryptocurrency's protocol, like "transactions must include valid digital
signatures", cannot be broken whatever you may try to spent, which means you
can trust that transactions in the blockchain are always valid, under any
circumstances.

You may have noticed that trust is still involved, but it has been moved. Where
trust was before in an authority or in government regulation, it is replaced by
cryptocurrency by trust in the protocol, i.e. the code. That's what the
"Code is law" mantra is all about. Trusting the code is still very important,
and that's why projects often decide that changes to the rules of the protocol
involve a majority of participants, or at least a majority of developers,
voting on whether to include each change. An important problem arises here:
if voting is conducted on the blockchain, the amount of votes one entity can
have is strongly correlated to the amount of money it can spend, meaning the
interests of the wealthy are prioritised. But that isn't all, another
disadvantage is hidden. Much like with democracy, you can control what others
will vote in many ways.

The most blatant example of this is Bitcoin's block size wars. In 2017, the
Bitcoin community was having a debate about what to do about the 1MB block size
limit, originally added by Satoshi as a temporary DDoS-protection measure.
During the debate, many who thought the block size limit should be increased,
which were called "big blockers", were banned from discussion forums like
/r/bitcoin. Because the vast majority of the community was already using these
forums and those creating new platforms were already banned, the community got
their information exclusively from the "small blockers" (those who believed in
keeping the limit as it was). Additionally, nodes of the Bitcoin network voting
for the block size increase found themselves DDoSed, and thus their votes could
not reach the network. In the end, the small blockers won. Did the censorship
play a part in this?

The true social experiment of cryptocurrency is governance: can we trust a
majority (in the case of Bitcoin, a majority of the capital, in other cases,
the majority of people) to vote on the best interests of everyone? This is why
the ideals of the blockchain like censorship resistance and trustlessness
should be considered a requirement even outside the blockchain. If they are not
respected, a social consensus can be achieved, but not a democracy. A biased
vote will not fulfill the best interests of the population.

Nowadays, Bitcoin Core developers are [allowed to make changes with consensus against them](https://www.reddit.com/r/btc/comments/3ujc4m/consensus_jgarzik_rbf_would_be_antisocial_on_the/).
The Bitcoin social experiment failed to uphold its foundational values. We must
ensure that the same does not happen to the other cryptocurrencies.

(don't take this article too seriously it was my first one and i'll be rewriting it again once i have more experience)
