# History of inflation in cryptocurrencies

*Inflation* can refer to two things. The first meaning, the one used
throughout this article, is the increase in the supply of money. The other is
an increase in prices (a decrease in the worth of that money), usually caused
by the increase in supply.

Decentralized blockchains are distributed to many computers, owned by people.
Running the software to secure the network incurs costs for those people, and
most people wouldn't run this software out of their good will, even if they
could break even. This is why, in most cryptocurrencies, all inflation comes
from compensating those who secure the network, which incentivizes
decentralization. It could be scary to think a single industry holds all new
created currency, but this is not a problem in practice.

In Proof of Work blockchains like Bitcoin, blocks must include a proof of work,
indicating that they use an amount of electricity which is specific by the
network. The process of creating this is executing an operation enough times,
until the result you get is a valid solution to some predefined equation, so
the time and power it takes to generate a proof of work is random, but are
automatically adjusted by the protocol so end up at a reasonable average.
Because mining (creating new blocks, including proofs of work) is profitable as
long as the cost of the electricity spent on mining is lower than the issuance
of new Bitcoin (inflation), the energy spent by the network as a whole will
usually approximately even out with the issuance of new coins. To pay for the
electricity they use, miners must sell their bitcoin when they receive it, so
inflation will end up in the hands of users who purchase Bitcoin from markets.

Over time, creating a single block has gotten so expensive that users have
created *mining pools*. In a mining pool, many people use the same operation
that requires burning electricity, but the rest of the block, including the
receiver for the new issuance, is given by a central entity. Whenever any of
the participants in the mining pool succeed in creating the proof of work, the
reward goes to the central entity, which then takes a small fee and
redistributes the reward to all participants proportional to how much work they
did, regardless of if they got the proof of work for that block. This allows
smaller mining operations to participate without having to compete with the
largest institutions, which can create proofs of work faster than the others.

Proof of Stake blockchains, contrary to Proof of Work blockchains, do not
"burn" anything when creating new coins. The "winner" of new issuance is chosen
randomly, with your chance of winning proportional to how much stake (coins
which are locked and cannot be spent) you have in the blockchain, as apposed
to how much electricity you burn. While this does still secure the network,
validators do not need to sell their coins anymore, which could concentrate
wealth and lead to disastrous economic outcomes. To combat this, *stake pools*
are used. Instead of the validator providing its own wealth to stake, users of
the blockchain can delegate their own coins to a validator, creating something
akin to a mining pool. We call this operation *staking*. Validators then take
a small fee (five to ten percent is the norm on Solana, for example),
distributing the issuance of new coins to the average users.

It is very important to point out that staking, unlike mining, has an extremely
low barrier to entry. Any user can stake their coins, however small their
deposit may be. They do not have to find places to acquire hardware, or be
wealthy enough to do so (even the bare minimum of hardware used for mining is
quite expensive), or understand and install software for mining or
participating in a mining pool, etc. Staking also improves decentralization,
because you can mine in countries where electricity costs less to make a larger
profit from mining, but you can't do that when staking virtual coins.

It is a common critique of Proof of Stake is that it creates a system where the
rich get richer, but the reality is quite the opposite. With stake pools, the
rich and the poor both get the exact same yields on their investments. The rich
may certainly be able to get a bit richer, as they already do, but the same
investment is now available to everyone else too, even if they aren't part of
"the rich". In the end, staking creates a more equitable economy. It makes the
people beneficiaries of inflation, not just victims of the increase of prices,
and allows everyone to protect their savings from inflation, in a way
fundementally built into the money system.
